Transparent Unions and Enums (#2645)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-transparent-unions.md

- Protects against accidental violations of that intent (e.g., adding a new non-ZST field to a transparent union will result in a compiler error).
- Makes a clear API guarantee that a `Wrapper<T>` can be transmuted to a `T`.

Transparent `union`s are a nice complement to transparent `struct`s, and this RFC rounds out the `#[repr(transparent)]` feature.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

A `union` may be `#[repr(transparent)]` in exactly the same conditions in which a struct may be `#[repr(transparent)]`. Some concrete illustrations follow.

A union may be `#[repr(transparent)]` if it has exactly one non-zero-sized field:

```rust
// This union has the same representation as `usize`.
#[repr(transparent)]
union CustomUnion {
    field: usize,
    nothing: (),
}
```

If the `union` is generic over `T` and has a field of type `T`, it may also be `#[repr(transparent)]` (even if `T` is a zero-sized type):

```rust
// This union has the same representation as `T`.
#[repr(transparent)]
pub union GenericUnion<T: Copy> { // Unions with non-`Copy` fields are unstable.
    pub field: T,
    pub nothing: (),
}

> // This is okay even though `()` is a zero-sized type.

Author: Added a clarification that generic ZSTs are only significant because [non-generic ZSTs can't be transparent](https://rust.godbolt.org/z/KMZpGF).

pub const THIS_IS_OKAY: GenericUnion<()> = GenericUnion { field: () };
```

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

> The logic controlling whether a `union` of type `U` may be `#[repr(transparent)]` should match the logic controlling whether a `struct` of type `S` may be `#[repr(transparent)]` (assuming `U` and `S` have the same generic parameters and fields).

Author: I have attempted to expand on this. Let me know if it is insufficient.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- `#[repr(transparent)]` on a `union` is of limited use. There are cases where it is useful, but they're not common and some users might unnecessarily apply `#[repr(transparent)]` to a `union`.

# Rationale and alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

> It would be nice to make `MaybeUninit<T>` `#[repr(transparent)]`. This type is a `union`, and thus this RFC is required in order to allow making it transparent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It would be nice to make `MaybeUninit<T>` `#[repr(transparent)]`. This type is a `union`, and thus this RFC is required to allow making it transparent.
```

> It would be nice to make `MaybeUninit<T>` `#[repr(transparent)]`. This type is a `union`, and thus this RFC is required in order to allow making it transparent.

Reviewer: People who are more involved with the `MaybeUninit<T>` discussion may understand why it is nice but I would put more effort into conveying this for uninitiated people, preferably with some examples.

Author: I added two examples.

> Of course, the standard "do nothing" alternative exists. Rust doesn't strictly *require* this feature. But it would benefit from this, so the "do nothing" alternative is undesirable.

Reviewer: I think this paragraph adds no value and can be removed entirely.

Author: Removed.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

See [the discussion on RFC #1758](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1758) (which introduced `#[repr(transparent)]`) for some discussion on applying the attribute to a `union`. A summary of the discussion:

> > https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1758#discussion_r80436621

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[nagisa_1]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1758#discussion_r80436621
```

> > **nagisa:** "Why not univariant unions and enums?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> + **[nagisa][nagisa_1]:** "Why not univariant unions and enums?"
```

> > **nox:** "I tried to be conservative for now given I don't have a use case for univariant unions and enums in FFI context."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> + **nox:** "I tried to be conservative for now given I don't have a use case for univariant unions and enums in FFI context."
```

> > https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1758#issuecomment-254872520

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[eddyb_1]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1758#issuecomment-254872520
```

> > **eddyb:** "I found another important usecase: for `ManuallyDrop<T>`, to be useful in arrays (i.e. small vector optimizations), it needs to have the same layout as `T` and AFAICT `#[repr(C)]` is not guaranteed to do the right thing"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> + **[eddyb][eddyb_1]:** "I found another important usecase: for `ManuallyDrop<T>`, to be useful in arrays (i.e. small vector optimizations), it needs to have the same layout as `T` and AFAICT `#[repr(C)]` is not guaranteed to do the right thing"
```

> > **retep998:** "So we'd need to be able to specify `#[repr(transparent)]` on unions?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> + **retep998:** "So we'd need to be able to specify `#[repr(transparent)]` on unions?"
```

> > **eddyb:** "That's the only way to be sure AFAICT, yes."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> + **eddyb:** "That's the only way to be sure AFAICT, yes."
```

> > https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1758#issuecomment-274670231

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[joshtriplett_1]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1758#issuecomment-274670231
```

> > **joshtriplett:** "In terms of interactions with other features, I think this needs to specify what happens if you apply it to a union with one field, a union with multiple fields, a struct (tuple or otherwise) with multiple fields, a single-variant enum with one field, an enum struct variant where the enum uses `repr(u32)` or similar. The answer to some of those might be "compile error", but some of them (e.g. the union case) may potentially make sense in some contexts."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> + **[joshtriplett][joshtriplett_1]:** "In terms of interactions with other features, I think this needs to specify what happens if you apply it to a union with one field, a union with multiple fields, a struct (tuple or otherwise) with multiple fields, a single-variant enum with one field, an enum struct variant where the enum uses `repr(u32)` or similar. The answer to some of those might be "compile error", but some of them (e.g. the union case) may potentially make sense in some contexts."
```

> > https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1758#issuecomment-290757356

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[pnkfelix_1]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1758#issuecomment-290757356
```

> > **pnkfelix:** "However, I personally do not think we need to expand the scope of the feature. So I am okay with leaving it solely defined on `struct`, and leave `union`/`enum` to a follow-on RFC later. (Much the same with a hypothetical `newtype` feature.)"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> + **[pnkfelix][pnkfelix_1]:** "However, I personally do not think we need to expand the scope of the feature. So I am okay with leaving it solely defined on `struct`, and leave `union`/`enum` to a follow-on RFC later. (Much the same with a hypothetical `newtype` feature.)"
```

> In summary, many of the questions regarding `#[repr(transparent)]` on a `union` were the same as applying it to a multi-field `struct`. These questions have since been answered, and I see no problems with applying those same answers to `union`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, many of the questions regarding `#[repr(transparent)]` on a `union` were the same as applying it to a multi-field `struct`. These questions have since been answered, so there should be no problems with applying those same answers to `union`.
```

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

None (yet).

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

> Univariant `enum`s are ommitted from this RFC in an effort to keep the scope small and avoid unnecessary bikeshedding. A future RFC could explore `#[repr(transparent)]` on a univariant `enum`.

Reviewer: The RFC states in the motivation that:
> ...this RFC rounds out the `#[repr(transparent)]` feature.

so you are making an argument by consistency, but that story is not completed unless we also support `enum`s.

Moreover, the extension of `#[repr(transparent)]` to `enum`s should have completely predictable static and dynamic semantics: Univariant enums are supported and treated as structs. Thus, I don't understand why it would lead to "bikeshedding" at all.

Author: I've revised the text to say "a step towards rounding out the `#[repr(transparent)]` feature" and have removed the inflammatory "and avoid unnecessary bikeshedding" text.

Reviewer: To clarify: I think this RFC should just deal with univariant enums now instead of postponing them for the future. Conservatism is not an end in itself and I think we should make the language consistent sooner rather than revisiting later so that we can be done with `#[repr(transparent)]`.

Author: The only question I have about transparent univariant enums is whether ZSTs are permitted to be transparent or not. Currently structs cannot ([even if they only have a single field](https://rust.godbolt.org/z/KMZpGF)).

Author: After thinking on this for a day, I've concluded that no, ZST univariant enums should not be permitted to be transparent (unless they're generic over `T` and have a field of type `T`). This follows the same rules for structs, and makes sense since a univariant enum is effectively just a struct. They shouldn't be treated specially or differently.

I'll revise the RFC to include univariant enums.

Author: Okay, I have now updated the RFC to include univariant enums.

Reviewer: Much obliged!

> If a `union` has multiple non-ZST fields, a future RFC could propose a way to choose the representation of that enum ([example](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/pre-rfc-transparent-unions/9441/6)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `union` has multiple non-ZST fields, a future RFC could propose a way to choose the representation of that `union` ([example](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/pre-rfc-transparent-unions/9441/6)).
```

- Feature Name: transparent_enunions
- Start Date: 2019-02-13
- RFC PR:
- Rust Issue:

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Allow `#[repr(transparent)]` on `union`s an univariant `enum`s that have exactly one non-zero-sized field (just like `struct`s).

Author: Thanks. Fixed.

- Feature Name: transparent_enunions
- Start Date: 2019-02-13
- RFC PR:
- Rust Issue:

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Allow `#[repr(transparent)]` on `union`s and univariant `enum`s that have exactly one non-zero-sized field (just like `struct`s).

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Some `union` types are thin newtype-style wrappers around another type, like `MaybeUninit<T>` (and [once upon a time](https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.28.0/src/core/mem.rs.html#955), `ManuallyDrop<T>`). This type is intended to be used in the same places as `T`, but without being `#[repr(transparent)]` the actual compatibility between it and `T` is left unspecified.

Likewise, some `enum` types only have a single variant, and are similarly thin wrappers around another type.

Making types like these `#[repr(transparent)]` would be useful in certain cases. For example, making the type `Wrapper<T>` (which is a `union` or univariant `enum` with a single field of type `T`) transparent:

- Clearly expresses the intent of the developer.

> - Protects against accidental violations of that intent (e.g., adding a new variant or non-ZST field will result in a compiler error).

Author: I'm not sure there's much to explore here since this is pretty different from `repr(transparent)`. `MyUnion` needs to be `repr(C)` (if not `repr(transparent)`) to be FFI-safe, but the developer can add additional sized fields to `MyUnion` (something that `repr(transparent)` would have prevented) (and there's no good way to prevent additional sized fields from being added to a `union`).

> - Protects against accidental violations of that intent (e.g., adding a new variant or non-ZST field will result in a compiler error).

Reviewer 2: Indeed. Is there an easy way to write a compile-time test to check that a union is indeed transparent ? If not, that's an argument that might be worth mentioning (e.g. without explicit transparent there is no easy way to write a test to check it).

> - Makes a clear API guarantee that a `Wrapper<T>` can be transmuted to a `T` or substituted for a `T` in an FFI function's signature.

Author: > `Wrapper<T>` can be transmuted into a `T` if its layout compatible with `T` - this does not necessarily require `Wrapper<T>` to be `repr(transparent)`.

I didn't say it requires `repr(transparent)` to be transmutable. The primary key is "a clear API guarantee". Two types can be transmutable, but this may not be clear, and may not be an API guarantee.

The caveat about passing uninitialized memory through FFI to external code is a good point. I've added a small note to make that explicit.

    Second(usize),
}
```

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

The logic controlling whether a `union` of type `U` may be `#[repr(transparent)]` should match the logic controlling whether a `struct` of type `S` may be `#[repr(transparent)]` (assuming `U` and `S` have the same generic parameters and fields). An `enum` of type `E` may be `#[repr(transparent)]` if it has exactly one variant, and that variant follows all the rules and logic controlling whether a `struct` of type `S` may be `#[repr(transparent)]` (assuming `E` and `S` have the same generic parameters, and `E`'s variant and `S` have the same and fields).

Like transarent `struct`s, a transparent `union` of type `U` and transparent `enum` of type `E` have the same layout, size, and ABI as their single non-ZST field. If they are generic over a type `T`, and all their fields are ZSTs except for exactly one field of type `T`, then they have the same layout and ABI as `T` (even if `T` is a ZST when monomorphized).

Like transparent `struct`s, transparent `union`s and `enum`s are FFI-safe if and only if their underlying representation type is also FFI-safe.

> A `union` may not be eligible for the same nonnull-style optimizations that a `struct` or `union` (with the same fields) are eligible for. Adding `#[repr(transparent)]` to  `union` does not change this. To give a more concrete example, it is unspecified whether `size_of::<T>()` is equal to `size_of::<Option<T>>()`, where `T` is a `union` (regardless of whether it is transparent). The Rust compiler is free to perform this optimization if possible, but is not required to, and different compiler versions may differ in their application of these optimizations.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `union` may not be eligible for the same nonnull-style optimizations that a `struct` or `enum` (with the same fields) are eligible for. Adding `#[repr(transparent)]` to  `union` does not change this. To give a more concrete example, it is unspecified whether `size_of::<T>()` is equal to `size_of::<Option<T>>()`, where `T` is a `union` (regardless of whether it is transparent). The Rust compiler is free to perform this optimization if possible, but is not required to, and different compiler versions may differ in their application of these optimizations.  
```

# Rationale and alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

It would be nice to make `MaybeUninit<T>` `#[repr(transparent)]`. This type is a `union`, and thus this RFC is required to allow making it transparent. One example in which a transparent representation would be useful is for unused parameters in an FFI-function:

```rust
#[repr(C)]
struct Context {
    // Imagine there a few fields here, defined by an external C library.
}

extern "C" fn log_event(message: core::ptr::NonNull<libc::c_char>,
                        context: core::mem::MaybeUninit<Context>) {
    // Log the message here, but ignore the context since we don't need it.
}

fn main() {
    extern "C" {
        fn set_log_handler(handler: extern "C" fn(core::ptr::NonNull<libc::c_char>,
                                                  Context));
    }

    // Set the log handler so the external C library can call log_event.
    unsafe {
        // Transmuting is safe since MaybeUninit<Context> and Context
        // have the same ABI.

>         set_log_handler(core::mem::transmute(log_event as *const ()));

Author: That (guaranteeing/documenting `MaybeUninit` as being effectively transparent without actually making it `repr(transparent)`) is what rkruppe suggested, but I disagree with that idea because:

1. `repr(transaprent)` is clear, explicit documentation that is also machine readable. Tools like RLS can provide this kind of useful documentation to IDEs. Without this, these tools have to hard-code which types are effectively transparent (or forego the useful information altogether).
2. I think explicit is better than implicit. `repr(transaprent)` is an explicit representation and guarantee to users that exists in the code and is part of a types documentation. Documenting a type as being effectively transparent is still explicit (from some perspectives), but not *in the code*. I personally prefer representations and guarantees to be explicit (especially when they're not overly verbose, and `repr(transparent)` doesn't suffer from any kind of problematic verbosity).

>         set_log_handler(core::mem::transmute(log_event as *const ()));

Reviewer 2: The problem that implicit transparent solves is removing some unnecessary undefined behavior from the Rust language. In this particular case: 

* there is very likely only one way in which any implementation can lay out these types, 
* users are going to exploit their knowledge of this whether we like it or not, and
* there does not appear to be any value in leaving the layout of these types undefined, e.g., in terms of layout optimizations that doing so would allow. 

In my opinion, there is just no good reason to leave this type of behavior as undefined, which is why I think it is going to end up being defined eventually.

That is why the arguments that you provide sound more in favor of explicit transparent than against implicit transparent to me. Implicit transparent solves a different problem that is not addressed by this RFC, it just so happens that solving that problem also tangentially improves on some of the issues identified by this RFC. 

Also, it is not an either / or thing: we can have both implicit and explicit transparent here. That might be a bit redundant, but I believe that the problem implicit transparent solves is worth solving, and I also believe that explicit transparent helps on top of implicit transparent. I wish the RFC would explore this angle a bit more, but even if we had implicit transparent, enforcing it at compile time would require users to write a "compile-time test" for it, with a better or worse error message, while explicit transparent would be quite a bit cleaner in this regard.

    }

    // We can call it too. And since we don't care about the context and
    // we're using MaybeUninit, we don't have to pay any extra cost for
    // initializing something that's unused.
    log_event(core::ptr::NonNull::new(b"Hello, world!\x00".as_ptr() as *mut _).unwrap(),
              core::mem::MaybeUninit::uninitialized());
}
```

It is also useful for consuming pointers to uninitialized memory:

```rust
#[repr(C)]
struct Cryptor {
    // Imagine there a few fields here, defined by an external C library.
}

// This function may be called from C (or Rust!), and matches the C
// function signature: bool(Cryptor *cryptor)

> pub extern "C" fn init_cryptor(cryptor: &mut core::mem::MaybeUninit<Cryptor>) -> bool {

Author: > which the current implementation satisfies

That's an implementation detail that isn't explicitly guaranteed. Perhaps the guarantee was intended but never made explicitly. `repr(transparent)` will guarantee this, though.

Also, if `MaybeUninit` is ever made `repr(C)` (instead of `repr(transparent)`), then that guarantee no longer holds since C makes no guarantees here (though I don't think any sane implementation would add padding to a `union` with a single sized field).

> pub extern "C" fn init_cryptor(cryptor: &mut core::mem::MaybeUninit<Cryptor>) -> bool {

Reviewer 2: > That's an implementation detail that isn't explicitly guaranteed.

This was identified in the unsafe code guidelines repo as something that's probably worth guaranteeing. AFAICT nothing is blocking this - somebody would just need to write an RFC for this that works out the details. 

> Also, if MaybeUninit is ever made repr(C) 

Note that `MaybeUninit` contains a ZST, and C does not support ZSTs, so to make `MaybeUninit` `repr(C)` we would need to specify what does it mean for a ZST to be `repr(C)`. As you mention, there aren't many ways of doing that, which is a good thing. If there is only a single sane way of handling ZSTs in `repr(C)` or C FFI, then that's something that we could guarantee and IMO we should - we'd just need an RFC working out the details here.

---

My point is not that we don't need `repr(transparent)` for unions at all, but rather that there are some cross-cutting concerns between this RFC, and some other problems that we'd also like to solve (`repr(C)` ZSTs, union fields at offset 0 in some cases, etc.).
